README.md, before:

<div align="center">
  <img src="docs/lilly-banner.png" width="445.4" alt="Lilly">
  <img src="https://github.com/tauraamui/lilly/assets/3159648/270286b3-67a6-48ca-9b9c-4566f605ec66" width="100%" height="25px">
</div>

## A VIM-Like editor for your terminal (<a href="https://discord.gg/N4UG2TfDfd">chat on Discord</a>)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Lilly is in a pre-alpha state, and only suitable for use by developers.
> This editor is technically usable, it is the exclusive editor used to work on itself,
> however many features are missing, and there is no guarantee of stable features or a lack of bugs.
> Features, bug fixes and issues are welcome.

![Screenshot 2023-11-17 20 07 13](https://github.com/tauraamui/lilly/assets/3159648/12e893ce-0120-4eb4-9d54-71b1a076832c)

![Screenshot 2023-12-01 21 01 45](https://github.com/tauraamui/lilly/assets/3159648/e9023db2-0214-49e1-baad-9a75aa22d291)

An editor designed as a batteries included experience, eliminating the need for plugins. So, basically Helix but for VIM
motions. The end vision is a one to one replacement/equivalent functionality for all VIM features, macros, motions, and more.

## Current project state (as of 25th Jun 2025)

I am adding this note to attempt to convey the current state of the project. The main focus for the last few months has been
to move the document rendering from the own `View.draw_document` method to the new `ui.BufferView` type. This was going fine
until the old method of rendering to the screen started to become a bottleneck. This resulted in a lot of flickering on 99% of term
emulators on all platforms slow + fast hardware alike, as the new document renderer was invoking a LOT more draw calls.

So migrating to the new document renderer was put on hold until the rendering performance issue was addressed. These two tasks
are now complete, so the document rendering performance is much much better (its also now possible to support fully filled in coloured backgrounds, yay!).
The immediate mode style API and indeed 99% of the code for the rest of Lilly did not need to change for the render speedup at all,
thanks to some initial foresight and good planning on my part (whew!).

The focus has now switched back to moving all document structure stuff to the new gap buffer implementation and away from the first naive
"what is literally the lowest effort thing we can do right now" list of strings, one string per line "line buffer". However, at present there
is too much coupling between the document buffer state within the Buffer type, and `View`. This coupling needs to be removed but while still
using the existing document data structure as to prevent too many large changes at once. I am attempting to acomplish this for now by
moving all direct document lines interaction into its own buffer implementation, called "LineBuffer". The aim is that once we have finished,
switching between different underlying buffers will be as simple as just changing the type field being used. This is currently not possible.

Anyway, I get that there is a lot of text here, but hopefully someone finds this useful to understand where I (tauraamui) am putting my main
focus within Lilly right now.

## Milestone 1: A pre-alpha release

### Targets:

- [ ] Gap buffer to replace string array
- [x] Within line visual mode (kind of)
- [ ] Fix found search result highlighting
- [ ] Horizontal scrolling
- [ ] Splits (horizontal + vertical)
- [ ] Goto def
- [x] List of active but not open buffers
- [x] Search/Find files
- [ ] Workspace wide search (ripgrep + roll your own)

## How to build (requires the V compiler https://vlang.io)

#### Build lilly by executing
	./make.vsh build-prod

#### or run with no binary build with
	./make.vsh run

You can see what other tasks are available to run with `./make.vsh --tasks`

(you can compile make.vsh into a binary to make executing tasks as fast as possible, use `./make.vsh compile-make` or `v -prod -skip-running make.vsh`)

### Not convinced?

Not a problem, Neovim/VIM are fantastic existing projects and are freely available for you to use today.

### misc + extra information

### radicle.xyz remote

The Lilly project is also hosted by (approx minimum 20 seeds) on the decentralised peer-to-peer git host network "Radicle".
If you would like to contribute using that instead of Github then please clone with:
`rad clone rad:zENt7TUiNcnJSf9H371PZ66XdgxE` and then submit a patch in the usual git way but using the rad toolchain (see https://radicle.xyz/guides/user#working-with-patches)

Feel free to also raise issues here, I will hopefully remember to check the inbox frequently.


### memleak checks

On macOS we get this output from running:

`leaks --atExit -- ./lilly .`

```
lilly(53176) MallocStackLogging: could not tag MSL-related memory as no_footprint, so those pages will be included in process footprint - (null)
lilly(53176) MallocStackLogging: recording malloc and VM allocation stacks using lite mode
Process 53176 is not debuggable. Due to security restrictions, leaks can only show or save contents of readonly memory of restricted processes.

Process:         lilly [53176]
Path:            /Users/USER/*/lilly
Load Address:    0x10294c000
Identifier:      lilly
Version:         0
Code Type:       ARM64
Platform:        macOS
Parent Process:  leaks [53172]

Date/Time:       2024-12-05 11:07:02.409 +0000
Launch Time:     2024-12-05 11:06:46.429 +0000
OS Version:      macOS 13.2.1 (22D68)
Report Version:  7
Analysis Tool:   /usr/bin/leaks

Physical footprint:         4513K
Physical footprint (peak):  4529K
Idle exit: untracked
----

leaks Report Version: 4.0, multi-line stacks
Process 53176: 226 nodes malloced for 22 KB
Process 53176: 0 leaks for 0 total leaked bytes.
```

Look at that. 0 memory leaks.

(experimental GUI render target)

![Screenshot 2023-12-13 21 10 40](https://github.com/tauraamui/lilly/assets/3159648/17ec7286-ecc2-4e68-addd-9c503afd45ee)

Commit message:

docs: add warning note regarding recommended commit to build on

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
  <img src="docs/lilly-banner.png" width="445.4" alt="Lilly">
  <img src="https://github.com/tauraamui/lilly/assets/3159648/270286b3-67a6-48ca-9b9c-4566f605ec66" width="100%" height="25px">
</div>

## A VIM-Like editor for your terminal (<a href="https://discord.gg/N4UG2TfDfd">chat on Discord</a>)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Lilly is in a pre-alpha state, and only suitable for use by developers.
> This editor is technically usable, it is the exclusive editor used to work on itself,
> however many features are missing, and there is no guarantee of stable features or a lack of bugs.
> Features, bug fixes and issues are welcome.
> (the master branch is currently in a slightly broken state, checkout commit bee9e01 for last known stable version)

![Screenshot 2023-11-17 20 07 13](https://github.com/tauraamui/lilly/assets/3159648/12e893ce-0120-4eb4-9d54-71b1a076832c)

![Screenshot 2023-12-01 21 01 45](https://github.com/tauraamui/lilly/assets/3159648/e9023db2-0214-49e1-baad-9a75aa22d291)

An editor designed as a batteries included experience, eliminating the need for plugins. So, basically Helix but for VIM
motions. The end vision is a one to one replacement/equivalent functionality for all VIM features, macros, motions, and more.

## Current project state (as of 25th Jun 2025)

I am adding this note to attempt to convey the current state of the project. The main focus for the last few months has been
to move the document rendering from the own `View.draw_document` method to the new `ui.BufferView` type. This was going fine
until the old method of rendering to the screen started to become a bottleneck. This resulted in a lot of flickering on 99% of term
emulators on all platforms slow + fast hardware alike, as the new document renderer was invoking a LOT more draw calls.

So migrating to the new document renderer was put on hold until the rendering performance issue was addressed. These two tasks
are now complete, so the document rendering performance is much much better (its also now possible to support fully filled in coloured backgrounds, yay!).
The immediate mode style API and indeed 99% of the code for the rest of Lilly did not need to change for the render speedup at all,
thanks to some initial foresight and good planning on my part (whew!).

The focus has now switched back to moving all document structure stuff to the new gap buffer implementation and away from the first naive
"what is literally the lowest effort thing we can do right now" list of strings, one string per line "line buffer". However, at present there
is too much coupling between the document buffer state within the Buffer type, and `View`. This coupling needs to be removed but while still
using the existing document data structure as to prevent too many large changes at once. I am attempting to acomplish this for now by
moving all direct document lines interaction into its own buffer implementation, called "LineBuffer". The aim is that once we have finished,
switching between different underlying buffers will be as simple as just changing the type field being used. This is currently not possible.

Anyway, I get that there is a lot of text here, but hopefully someone finds this useful to understand where I (tauraamui) am putting my main
focus within Lilly right now.

## Milestone 1: A pre-alpha release

### Targets:

- [ ] Gap buffer to replace string array
- [x] Within line visual mode (kind of)
- [ ] Fix found search result highlighting
- [ ] Horizontal scrolling
- [ ] Splits (horizontal + vertical)
- [ ] Goto def
- [x] List of active but not open buffers
- [x] Search/Find files
- [ ] Workspace wide search (ripgrep + roll your own)

## How to build (requires the V compiler https://vlang.io)

#### Build lilly by executing
	./make.vsh build-prod

#### or run with no binary build with
	./make.vsh run

You can see what other tasks are available to run with `./make.vsh --tasks`

(you can compile make.vsh into a binary to make executing tasks as fast as possible, use `./make.vsh compile-make` or `v -prod -skip-running make.vsh`)

### Not convinced?

Not a problem, Neovim/VIM are fantastic existing projects and are freely available for you to use today.

### misc + extra information

### radicle.xyz remote

The Lilly project is also hosted by (approx minimum 20 seeds) on the decentralised peer-to-peer git host network "Radicle".
If you would like to contribute using that instead of Github then please clone with:
`rad clone rad:zENt7TUiNcnJSf9H371PZ66XdgxE` and then submit a patch in the usual git way but using the rad toolchain (see https://radicle.xyz/guides/user#working-with-patches)

Feel free to also raise issues here, I will hopefully remember to check the inbox frequently.


### memleak checks

On macOS we get this output from running:

`leaks --atExit -- ./lilly .`

```
lilly(53176) MallocStackLogging: could not tag MSL-related memory as no_footprint, so those pages will be included in process footprint - (null)
lilly(53176) MallocStackLogging: recording malloc and VM allocation stacks using lite mode
Process 53176 is not debuggable. Due to security restrictions, leaks can only show or save contents of readonly memory of restricted processes.

Process:         lilly [53176]
Path:            /Users/USER/*/lilly
Load Address:    0x10294c000
Identifier:      lilly
Version:         0
Code Type:       ARM64
Platform:        macOS
Parent Process:  leaks [53172]

Date/Time:       2024-12-05 11:07:02.409 +0000
Launch Time:     2024-12-05 11:06:46.429 +0000
OS Version:      macOS 13.2.1 (22D68)
Report Version:  7
Analysis Tool:   /usr/bin/leaks

Physical footprint:         4513K
Physical footprint (peak):  4529K
Idle exit: untracked
----

leaks Report Version: 4.0, multi-line stacks
Process 53176: 226 nodes malloced for 22 KB
Process 53176: 0 leaks for 0 total leaked bytes.
```

Look at that. 0 memory leaks.

(experimental GUI render target)

![Screenshot 2023-12-13 21 10 40](https://github.com/tauraamui/lilly/assets/3159648/17ec7286-ecc2-4e68-addd-9c503afd45ee)
